---
title: Dealing with too much work
date: 2019-03-05
updated:
description:
tags: career, beginners
cover_image:
for: ic, junior, mid, senior
---

One of the most common problems in software jobs is the constant crunch
of too much work. Projects will usually try to cram too many features
into too little time, and often this pressure leads to too many projects
being worked on in parallel.

Keeping too much work in-flight leads to more distractions that suck up
available time and mental bandwidth. When there are 4 high-priority
projects sitting that need to be done ASAP, that pressure effects the
entire team. You'll likely face different stakeholders interrupting you
with their top priority, regardless of what you should be focusing on.

# Distracting meetings

These conflicting interests may present themselves as meetings that pull
your focus to tasks you're not actively working on. There are some
things you can to do limit the number of unproductive meetings you
attend.

Before the meeting starts, you should already know what it will be
about. Either the conversations you've had with coworkers or the meeting
invitation itself should be enough for you to decide if it's something
that will keep you productive. It could have a detailed agenda, a short
description, or even just a clear meeting name.

Don't be afraid to clarify why a meeting has been scheduled. You may be
better off skipping some meetings to focus on your own tasks. Meetings
are a great way keep people in the loop or come to a decision, but in
larger teams they may invite more people than necessary. You should
expect to evaluate whether you're needed at any meeting and to come
prepared.

There's a quote I like: “A meeting without notes never happened.” There
needs to be a record of what was discussed, what was decided, and what
follow ups have to happen. Sharing this with all participants will help
prevent miscommunications, keep meetings from repeatedly discussing the
same topic, and generally keep the team moving forwards.

# Interruptions

External stakeholders that compete for your attention will eat away at
your productivity minutes at a time. They'll bring you new information,
changes to requirements, and ask for clarifications unrelated to your
top priority. These interruptions will require to you to shift contexts,
handle the interruption, and then shift back to the task at hand.

There are 2 categories of communication: synchronous and asynchronous.
Your team likely has several asynchronous communication methods. A Slack
channel, email, project management software, etc. Picking a relevant
asynchronous communication method when information doesn't need to be
addressed immediately significantly reduces time-wasting disruptions.

If synchronous communication methods like chatting at someone's
workspace, making a phone/video call, or calling a meeting are reserved
for urgent or high-importance matters, then the entire team will be more
efficient. It will also keep people more engaged when those methods are
used.

You'll have to get buy-in from your coworkers on this, so talk to your
peers, team leaders, and managers to help determine what the norms
should be. Clear communication will help prevent miscommunications,
reduce time spent gathering information, and minimize context switching.

# The costs of lost time

Aside from communication, there's a more subtle, long-term drain on
productivity when too many projects compete for focus. When there are
several projects that need to be done ASAP, you may feel pressure to end
work on a project before the final details can be polished.

New development is often messy, and something that works will benefit
from another thorough review of the logic. There's mantra when writing
code: “Make it work, make it right, make it fast.” With too much work
in-flight simultaneously, projects look done once the code works.

Hunting down edge cases, fine-tuning internal abstractions, and
optimizing bottlenecks are important preventative maintance. These final
details are often what keeps code from deteriorating into an difficult
to maintain pile of spaghetti over a period of months. You may realize
that there is unused or redundant logic, that some function names no
longer make sense, or find some code that can be extracted and reused.
