---
title:
  'Questions to ask your interviewer: Project management &
  prioritization'
published: true
description:
  What should you respond when an interviewer asks you, “Do you have any
  questions for us?” This series will give you questions that will help
  you identify problem environments before you start working.
series: Questions to ask your interviewer
tags: career, jobs, interviews
canonical_url: https://medium.com/@vcarl/questions-to-ask-your-interviewer-project-management-and-prioritization-69ac3aad3689
date: 2018-06-07
---

In my career I have worked for 6 different companies, ranging from 4th
hire at a startup to a senior developer at a Fortune 100 financial
company. This leaves me an uncommon perspective on how a wide range of
companies operate. Changing jobs so many times has given me a lot of
experience interviewing, as well.

I’ve compiled a list of questions that I ask, wish I had asked, or plan
to ask in the future. Each question has details about why I find that
question valuable and what answers I expect. It ended up being a lot
longer than I expected, so I’m splitting it up into several parts so it
isn’t too overwhelming:

- The onboarding process, workplace, and team
- The development environment and emergency situations
- Personal growth
- Project management (this one)

## How do you balance shipping new features and maintaining the codebase?

There is always a need for this balance. My personal rough estimate is
that about 1/3rd of development time is needed for maintenance, whether
that's refactoring code that doesn't meet changing requirements,
identifying and deleting dead code, improving build or test
configuration, or other non-user facing tasks.

I firmly believe that, all told, about a third of project time will be
spent on these tasks. That could be 1 out of every 3 days, sprints,
months, or years. If you push nothing but features for two years, can
you afford to dedicate the next year to the maintenance tasks you've
deferred?

It's easy to pay lip service to allocating time for maintenance, but
allowing it to happen regularly and be worked to completion–not just
until the sprint ends–is another story. This makes it hard to judge
their response at face value, so you might need to work around the edges
of this question instead of asking it outright. Asking questions about
their experience with different kinds of maintenance might allow you to
fill out a more reliable answer What's the lifecycle of new development,
from somebody's idea to deployment?

## What's the lifecycle of new development, from somebody's idea to deployment?

This is one of the largest deciders of company culture in my mind. How
work is planned, coordinated, and communicated from ideation to
implementation is the basis for how productive the company is. The
clearer the answer to this question, the more likely the company is to
have a healthy understanding and respect for the people involved in it.

Many companies operate in silos, with discrete handoffs between teams
and very little communication outside of that. The most effective
organizations I've worked in have actively encouraged communication
outside of these handoffs, involving as many interrelated groups as
necessary at each stage in the process. Coordinating many different
stakeholders and keeping the discussion productive is difficult, and the
most obvious solution of "put everyone in a room and hash it out!" has
many pitfalls that can grind progress to a halt.

Unfortunately I don't really know what answer I'd like to hear most from
this questions, but I think it's very informative as to how they work,
and can serve to raise red flags that they aren't aware of.

##How do you track tasks? How are those tasks created?

This is both a question of how detailed their task tracking is (I have
yet to work anywhere that tracks time spent per ticket, but this would
be a great way to suss that out) and what their process around creating
and organizing tasks and tickets is. Ticket creation, grooming,
prioritization, assignment, work tracking, determining "done", and
handling unplanned work that arises are handled slightly differently by
every team, and a lot of places don't give these steps the consideration
they're due.

Do you do agile/scrum? Some people distinguish between "agile" and
capital-A "Agile," and "scrum" entails certain defined processes that
are aimed at fulfiling the goals of agile. The original agile manifesto
was written in 2001, which was distilled into 12 principles. Everywhere
I've worked has professed to do agile, and none of them have done it the
same way.

In several cases I've found "agile" means doing standups, calling
tickets stories, and excusing chaos as "being responsive to changing
requirements." I encourage engineers to familiarize themselves with the
agile principles and periodically question if the practices they
experience at work live up to them.

Asking whether they do agile should serve as a gateway for asking for
more information about their process. Agile principles recommend working
as a team to establish a set of practices that work for those
individuals with the agile principles and manifesto as the driving force
behind it. Agile and scrum are not prescriptive, they're goals and
starting points. Each team should expect it to evolve, especially when
the team grows or shrinks.

## How do you decide what to build?

This can be a good way to get an idea of how much planning is done
before starting work, and what level of involvement you as an individual
engineer will be able to have. Answers might range from "we get specs
and implement them" to "we survey customers to identify pain points."

For large companies that have significant numbers of stakeholders,
receiving specs may be perfectly adequate. The smaller the company, the
further the answer should move towards being focused on finding and
meeting customer needs.

## Do you have "swimlanes" in your task tracking? What are they called?

Swimlanes are the columns on a Kanban board, which is frequently used in
agile to visualize the status of work. What they're named can be a
simple way to get an idea of how the team mentally models the work they
do. At its most simple, they might be named, "backlog," "in progress,"
and "done."

I've found that what works for teams I've been on is having a backlog,
in progress, ready to review, ready to test, and delivered.

## How do you know when something is done?

There's a classic problem of what constitutes "done" in software teams.
"It's done, but it's not, you know, done done." A software developer
thinks it's done when the PR is merged, a QA thinks it's done when it's
tested, and the business thinks it's done when it's shipped and
delivering value.

I recently saw a tweet describing "done," "done done," and "done done
done" as a slightly humorous but genuinely helpful description of what
these states look like.

Having a shared understanding across the team and organization of what
"done" means will help avoid misunderstandings around deadlines, and the
more clearly their answer communicates that they've thought this
through, the better.

## What project management software do you use?

This is purely for information gathering. In my career, I've used
Pivotal, Asana, Wrike, JIRA, Trello, post-it notes + a whiteboard,
printed cards, and likely other schemes I'm forgetting. Getting a sense
for how each of these tools model work will help you in your career and
prepare you when you're joining a new team.

You'll have to build up a list of what constitutes a wrong answer to
this question yourself. Different people enjoy working with different
task tracking software. Personally, I find JIRA to be the worst, except
for all the others.

---

Thanks for reading! I hope these questions will help you find a job that
makes you happy. I’m on Twitter as
[@vcarl\_](https://twitter.com/vcarl_), and I moderate
[Reactiflux](https://discord.gg/s6dJcJt), a chatroom for React
developers (shoutout to the
[jobs-advice channel](https://discord.gg/s6dJcJt)), and
[Nodeiflux](https://discordapp.com/invite/vUsrbjd), a chatroom for
Node.JS developers. If you have any questions or suggestions, reach out!
