---
title: Growth
published: true
description:
  What should you respond when an interviewer asks you, “Do you have any
  questions for us?” This series will give you questions that will help
  you identify problem environments before you start working.
series: Questions to ask your interviewer
tags: career, interviews
cover_image: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2000/0*1CjD_XfuiDria7xW.
canonical_url: https://medium.com/@vcarl/questions-to-ask-your-interviewer-growth-c88eed119ce2
date: 2018-05-21
---

(image credit: [Jake Hills](https://unsplash.com/@jakehills))

In my career I have worked for 6 different companies, ranging from 4th
hire at a startup to a senior developer at a Fortune 100 financial
company. This leaves me an uncommon perspective on how a wide range of
companies operate. Changing jobs so many times has given me a lot of
experience interviewing, as well.

I’ve compiled a list of questions that I ask, wish I had asked, or plan
to ask in the future. Each question has details about why I find that
question valuable and what answers I expect. It ended up being a lot
longer than I expected, so I’m splitting it up into several parts so it
isn’t too overwhelming:

- The onboarding process, workplace, and team
- The development environment and emergency situations
- Personal growth (this one)
- Project management

Personal growth is the best investment. It compounds and expands on
itself, opening up opportunities that weren’t available before. The best
companies acknowledge this and take advantage of it by encouraging
employees to learn and improve. All told, a company will receive more
benefit by hiring a junior developer and turning them into a senior
developer. The developer will form connections with teammates and learn
details about the product and business that can only come with time.

To wax poetic for a moment, I like to think about programming in the
grand scheme of things to keep it in perspective. “Programming” has only
existed in a vaguely recognizable form for around 60 years (dating from
FORTRAN’s introduction on punched cards in 1957). We’ve only written
code, using a keyboard to write human-readable programming languages,
for about 50 years. We’ve been creating mechanical devices for hundreds
of years, designing buildings and bridges for thousands. As a
discipline, we’ve learned how to make things that work, but are still
learning how to make things that last. Given that position, we have to
see how what we’ve written ages, and try out new ideas that might age
better.

# Personal growth

## About what fraction of their time are developers given (implicitly or explicitly) freedom to explore or learn?

As developers, we sell our expertise. Exploration and learning are
necessary to keep up with the rapid evolution of the tools we use. We
must discover or learn new solutions to problems we’ve encountered, or
to those we will encounter in the future. The tools we use, the
languages we write, and the environments where we run code are always
evolving.

Companies need us to be able to overcome challenges quickly. The best
way to do that is to have a wide array of background knowledge to draw
from. Learning by reading articles, experimenting within the codebase,
or by starting new projects will help you in ways that aren’t
immediately obvious. You have to be allowed to hone your skills, which
will help keep you sharp and expand where you can help.

You’ll get the most honest answers to this question from developers
you’ll be working with. Many times, developers aren’t granted explicit
permission to explore. But they may find themselves with some degree of
free time when taking into account delays introduced by external
feedback cycles. As long as the results of their exploration have a
chance to be included, this can be a workable situation.

## How do you define success and growth for developers?

Many employers would be happy to define success as hitting all your
deadlines, and growth as shortening time between deadlines. Some
companies will have mentorship programs in place, or will help you grow
into a leadership role. Others may give you the freedom to work with
adjacent teams, dabbling across the stack. They may have a collaborative
environment that expose you to non-technical parts of development, like
product or design.

Being able to define growth for yourself means knowing what you want,
and doing some introspection from time to time. A great employer may
give you all the support you could dream of, but you need to have goals
for yourself!

## How often do you do lunch and learns or other semi-formal knowledge sharing?

Knowledge sharing between developers can be one of the most valuable
parts of a job. Early in your career, frequent opportunities to learn
from your coworkers’ experience can open your eyes to new ideas or
tools. As you gain technical experience, lunch and learns can help you
get used to public speaking. Giving technical talks at meetup groups or
conferences will level up your career. Lunch and learns are a great way
to practice in a familiar environment.

It’s great if somebody in the workplace organizes weekly or bimonthly
lunch and learns, but another great answer is “not enough!” Organizing
internal events like that can put you in touch with lots of great
coworkers, and they’re a great learning experience. It will also get you
a reputation as somebody who cares enough to get involved, which is less
common than you might think.

## How often would I have one-on-ones with my manager?

It’s generally understood that one-on-ones are a necessary part of
effective software management. They provide opportunities to talk about
things that aren’t directly related to the immediate task at hand.
Managers that don’t have one-on-ones miss the chance to catch workplace
issues before they grow.

One-on-ones are often weekly, but having them too often can cause them
to become routine or even disruptive. They should occur as needed, often
enough that you know that you’ll have a chance to talk. I’m happy
whenever they’re scheduled to occur, however. The details of scheduling
can evolve as you work there longer.

## What kinds of topics are usually discussed in 1:1s?

It’s very easy for these one-on-one chats to turn into status updates,
but that’s not what they should be used for. One-on-ones are too
valuable an opportunity for direct contact with your manager for them to
become routine updates.

They should be a chance to talk about your career growth and future
opportunities. You should talk through any frustrations you’re
experiencing and get to know each other better. You may not have many
other opportunities to chat with your manager, so one-on-ones may be the
best time to talk generally about the possibility of a raise after an
accomplishment, or how you’re craving more responsibility.

## Do you pay for conferences?

Professional conferences are great opportunities to meet other
developers, learn from speakers, and represent the business. Tickets,
flights, and accommodations can be expensive, but it’s an opportunity to
stay on the cutting edge of new development and bring back knowledge to
share with the team.

For companies that pay, it’s not uncommon for it to be a reward for
performance, or for there to be an expectation that you’ll share some of
what you learned while there. It may also come with a responsibility to
represent the company as a recruitment and brand-awareness tactic. I’d
like if I could attend one conference a year without an expectation of
presenting afterwards, but anything more than that will likely come with
increased expectations of you.

---

Thanks for reading the third group of questions to ask your interviewer!
Stay tuned for the final part, with questions about project management
processes, in a few days. I’m on Twitter as
[@vcarl\_](https://twitter.com/vcarl_), and I moderate
[Reactiflux](https://discord.gg/s6dJcJt), a chatroom for React
developers (shoutout to the
[jobs-advice channel](https://discord.gg/s6dJcJt)), and
[Nodeiflux](https://discordapp.com/invite/vUsrbjd), a chatroom for
Node.JS developers. If you have any questions or suggestions, reach out!
